Wednesday, 31 December 1985
It is 17:50. The plane has just taken off and will take us far, very far, to where, for nearly two years, we dreamt of returning. We are barely 50 people in this big 747 which is flying to SANAA, magical city, dream city, dazzling city which will become a reality in a few hours. 86 is soon, in a few hours, in a few minutes. That’s it, we are now in 1986 and it’s champagne galore. It is barely 4 o’clock in the morning when the plane lands in SANAA. The dream, which we nurtured for so long, is there in front of us, for us. Jean is there to welcome us. Fortunately since I forgot his telephone number. It is cold in the terminal. Jean takes us to his place in his Suzuki. He went to bed late because of New Year’s Eve. But he still came to pick us up at 4 in the morning. We await daybreak at his place with

a glass of ??????.<div class="note"></div> Jean’s house is situated behind the cinema on the border between the new and the old city. At 7 o’clock, when day breaks, we climb onto the roof. The view is amazing, infinitely more beautiful than from the roof of Sam City: we see the city bathed in a still feeble light, the minarets pointing towards the sky. The view moves me. SANAA, the most beautiful city in the world; from Jean’s house… As usual, after too long an absence, I find it difficult to regain the closeness, the intimacy which we acquired over weeks and months of a friendship woven together. I also feel an urgent need to recreate this closeness. I seek the stumbling block, the small detail that will put us back on the same path. I need this closeness. But what a strange fellow is Jean “who protects himself,” maybe because he knows me too well and he knows how far I can go with those who do not know how to protect themselves. I believe it is going to be very difficult to get something out of Jean.

He takes us to the Orient Hotel, situated at the end of his street. We slept just 2 hours on the plane, we are exhausted, we go back for a couple of hours’ sleep as we have to go to the tourist office to get our permits before 10 o’clock. Hey, by the way, tourists who stay for less than 1 month in Yemen don’t need anymore to go to the Ministry of the Interior to get the entry visa and exit visa. Once we get the permits, we go and respire the air of SANAA in the old city, not far from Tahrir… always as dusty. We drink the excellent tea with milk All day long. At 13:00 we have a meeting with Jean. We spend some time in the mufredj discussing this and that, hearing the latest Yemenite gossip, the latest stories about this or that issue, the quarrels between the tribes… I love to hear him.

(???)<div class="note"></div> I greatly admire Jean for his immediate sociological understanding of events, for his need to rationalize any behavior, attitude. From his mufredj, where we are sitting, the postcard view of the old city laid out before our eyes is unique. We try to reach on the phone our friend, sheikh Abdul Quasser. His wife answers and claims that he is asleep and we should call back at 3 o’clock. We go out for lunch, in the meantime… to eat the fish we dreamt of for so long, and about which we had so many fantasies. The reality is equal to the memory: fish, feta, spicy sauce, everything is there… we taste/savor. We return to Jean’s place. We call the sheikh: he picks up the phone. Jean tells him that Myriam and Frédéric have just arrived in SANAA. He invites us to come to his place

in an hour. Sheikh Abdul Quasser<div class="note"></div> lives in a big house at the entrance to Babel Cho’oub<div class="note"></div>. When we arrive, we find him alone sitting in his mufredj, chewing qat. Next to him, on a small low table, lies a telephone – two worlds trying to co-habitate. Sheikh Abdul Quasser tells us that he had to go to London for an operation (as the one he had done in Egypt was not successful). His brother, Abdul Quarad, has just returned from a long trip to Europe – Germany, England and France. We hear news about Beit Sinan. The women, apparently, waited for Myriam throughout the month of October; they watched all the cars that arrived in Beit Sinan. Without us asking for anything, he offers to take us tomorrow morning to Sinan – tamam!!<div class="note"></div> We bid farewell to our sheikh. As we exit his house, we run into his driver.

Abdul Quasser will come and fetch us at the hotel tomorrow morning at 9. It is already dark when we leave the sheikh’s house, we have some errands to do. We need to buy perfume for presents as we don’t have enough. Perfume is less expensive in SANAA. Pascal comes to see us in the hotel; he is in SANAA for a UNESCO mission. We ask him about the latest Yemenite gossip. Dinner with Jean and his “doe,” fish for a change.

Thursday, January 2, 1986
At 9 o’clock, on the dot, Abdul Quasser is there with his driver. We drive around the city to buy vegetables, meat, qat, before heading for Beit Sinan. After passing the first checkpoint, Abdul Quasser and his driver collect their guns from a grocery store at the edge of the road and load 2 Qabilis<div class="note"></div> in the back of the car. After the asphalt road, there is the same route, nothing has changed, as dusty as ever. The landscape that presents itself, though already familiar to us, is a source of wonder. A desert landscape covered in black rock and the odd hamlet here and there. We cross the famous village where a vendetta took place 5 years ago. It seems that there was a rumpus a few months ago which left 20 dead; the sheikh told them that if they didn’t stop, he would intervene, he and his men. Everything seems to have got back to normal since then.

The car pushed on, we glimpsed the sheikh’s two houses, on the hill. We stop at Beit El Aifa. Abdul Quarad is sitting in a grocery store. It’s a joyful reunion. We introduce Linda. We continue to Beit Sinan. Soon it’s time for lunch. I am not at all hungry. I have barely digested the fish and the feta… and I know what awaits us… We’ll have to honor our sheikh. Resting in Abdul Wasser’s mufredj. Our photos are already majoritaire in Sinan. The photo of the three sheikhs takes pride of place in the mudredj, next to that of the ancestor. We are a little surprised by the arrival of 2 Yemenites in European dress… speaking perfect English. They are the experts in charge of drilling for water and conveying the water. They spend their time wandering up and down the country. Arhab suffers partially from dryness. After lunch, we leave with the 2 sheikhs, the “experts” and a flock of Qabilis to visit the drilling sites.

It’s the hour of the qat. I never saw a “qat mufredj” so full. We spend almost an hour chewing, Then we decide to go and say hello to our friends, we will return at nightfall, we want to enjoy the last rays of sunlight. Privileged moments – a trip into time – emotional reunions; loss for words, gazes, smiles, handshakes, hugs which say it all. Expectations which I feel are reciprocal. To think, it’s 2 years since we were last here. It feels like yesterday. Return to the “Diwan.” Our qat chewers are there but, since at such an hour, no one is talking, the only sound is that of the gurgling of nargilas. We sit outside the diwan, where Mursa, Abdul Quasser’s driver, is sitting with other Qabilis. We sing some French songs. Like last year, the evenings are very long, too long,

all the more so, as we cannot withdraw or retire to our own mufredj. We have to be present, listen to the gurglings of the nargila. [...]<!-- We also have to bear the 11th plague, Beit Sinan’s homosexual, who sneaks into our mufredj and spends a good part of the evening in our company… which he seems to enjoy! The bastard rubs himself. At first, against me. Under the pretext that it’s cold, he lays a blanket over us and takes advantage of the situation to touch me. I dare not put him in his place, so I move to another spot. If Linda had not accompanied us, we would never have known that the man was simply a crazy fellow, “a sex friend,” who likes men, women and whatever he can lay hands on. Now, it’s Linda, whom he’s going for but she puts him in his place. When he is there, we are unable to do anything, he is so clingy – like glue.-->

We greatly looked forward to these reunions with those whom, throughout this “diary” I shall call “our friends”; and everything was wonderful. I try to identify the chronology of those moments spent with “our friends” and I scrutinize the contact sheet number 673. All we can do is follow our sheikhs into the qat mufredj. For courtesy’s sake <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42204">(shots 4-8)</span>. But we only have one thing in mind: to go and see our friends again. The path that leads to their house is not long but it is a veritable fighter’s course; any person we cross paths with could be fatal for us. Today will be our first visit after a 2 years absence and I remember well the cold welcome given to us by Salem and Amram last year; we could not spend one minute with them without the presence of an Arab. We now risked encountering the same situation as last time. Once exiting the mufredj, we have the choice of several routes. We chose to pass under the sheikh’s house as seen clearly in <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42207">photo number 9</span> taken for this purpose. The closer we get to our goal, the faster we push ahead. My anxiety is huge… How will we be received?? The welcome is undreamt of. During the first moments of our reunion, I quickly give Amram the 2 mezuzas (which he kisses), not knowing how much time we will be able to talk freely without the presence of the Arabs. Time passes and the emotion is great. These reunions are undreamt of. As sunset approaches, the mufredj is bathed In exceptional light <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42208">(shots 10 to 17)</span>. The emotion makes us forget all the questions we had prepared. We keep telling them that we are here just for them… Do they truly understand? I think their welcome is the most beautiful reply. The sun has set, we have to head back. One last photo <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42216">(18.19.20)</span>, where they make the tanurs<div class="note"></div>. We leave a dream. However, we must return to reality.

Friday, January 3, 1986
Waking up in Beit Sinan, always magical. From our mufredj on the top floor of the house, we see in the distance the mountain chain beyond which the kingdom of Arhab ends. Breakfast with Abdul Quasser in his mufredj. Linda’s bag has just given way under the weight of the perfumes I had filled it with. We have to find someone to repair it. We ask our sheikh who suggests we go down to the house of “AL YAOUD”<div class="note"></div>. We will thus visit our friends on the advice of our friend, the sheikh, who will join us later. In all the homes here, hospitality is the number one law. It’s a blessing that Linda’s bag broke! We rush to the house of “al Yaoud” with the blessing of Abdul Wasser. When we arrive, Amram is getting ready to carry out a shechita <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42168">(contact sheet 672)</span>. The women are in the kitchen busy making bread for Shabbat. Soon, too soon, we have barely spent half an hour alone with our friends when Abdul Wasser “turns up” with a flock of Qabilis and children <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42219">(contact sheet 673, shots 21-24)</span>.

to join us… And soon a flock of Qabilis arrive on the premises. A blanket was brought to the sheikh so that he could sit outside, and the hide of an animal was given to him so that he would not be cold. He receives the honors due to him. He is served raisins and dates. Then we are invited into the mufredj to partake in a light meal. The sheikh makes a point of stressing that, after this, lunch will be served at his place. The dishes which are served to us are succulent. Pieces of bread dipped in butter + onion tops covered in honey – EXQUISITE. We want to buy some wicker baskets. The sheikh does not want us to spend one penny, all the more so as the Qabilis are there (outside). We return with Abdul Quasser to his place for lunch. After lunch, we spend a good part of the afternoon on the roof of the house, in front of

our mufredj, sunbathing in the Arhab sun. On reflection, I feel that, over the years, we slowly achieved something that resembles independence… even if we remain, here in Sinan, the attraction 2of the moment. We take advantage of the last rays of sunlight to go out and take photographs. Today, Myriam and Linda are with the women, they were invited for a qat session. I go outside to take a turn, alone, without an escort, which is rare here. The evening is going to be a long one. [...]<!-- We go from mufredj to mufredj, Abdul Warad, the homo, doesn’t let us go for a single moment. He tries his old ploys again. --> We watch the TV, it’s always as amusing as ever. The ads with blue-eyed blondes and American playboys.

After having spent a lot of time this morning with our friends, we don’t want to be imprudent and return to see them this afternoon. To think, we are just a few meters from their house; I am sick at the thought of this but I have to be rational. What we just experienced with them was so extraordinary. Of course, we would love to welcome Shabbat with them, join them for the seuda<div class="note"></div>… Maybe on our next trip… or never… or solely in my head. I forgot to mention the making of the tanurs which we witnessed, <span class="chrono-link" id="item-42417">contact sheet 676</span>.
The color photos came out better. I find it very difficult to work in such a harsh light.

Saturday 4
“Mursa”, the driver, knocks on the door of our mufredj to wake us up. We leave for Wadi Hared after a small breakfast in the courtyard of the house. “Allah, Allah”, I say, as I walk down the steps of the house, in case I encounter a woman. The road that leads to Wadi Hared is amazing. We glimpse Al Arjan, a big village; we cross Wadi al Meh, we see, at the far end of the wadi, Beit Hazeb. Then another village: Sira. Then Wadi Hared. [...]<!-- The homo insisted on joining us with his son Ahmad. --> Wadi Hared has changed a lot. It has become a veritable camping site where the Qabilis gather together to take a dip. The water couldn’t be clearer. It’s a hot water spring. I decide to take a dip too with the Qabilis. Everyone wants to ask Mursa: who is that greenhorn?

Everyone has deposited their arms, their djambia and djellaba at the edge of the pool. After so much dust, my trousers feel rigid in the evening. I enjoy the youthful dip. Myriam and Linda watch and photograph us. Wadi Hared is an oasis in the middle of a stone desert, a forest of bulrushes where you can hear the sound of the water flowing. A “mejnun”<div class="note"></div> who seems to want to fool around with his djambia and revolver reminds us how every situation is precarious in a tribal society where force is the supreme value. We realize how the friendships we formed with important figures at the center of this tribal world are important, friendships without which we would never have been able to come – alone – to such remote areas. Here we are the protégés of Sheikh Sinan. Return to Beit Sinan, lunch with Abdul Quasser and Warad.

We spend a good part of the afternoon on the balcony in the sun. Myriam and Linda are going to go and chat with the women. Abdul Quasser is chewing alone this afternoon in his mufredj. I join him late in the afternoon after having taken a stroll with Myriam and Linda before sunset… escorted by… the entire village. The evenings are not so long. We acquire, each day, more independence and manage to isolate ourselves in our mufredj. Before going to our quarters, we are shown a video film which Abdul Warad brought back from Germany. Unbelievable but true: it’s a film about Yemenite Jews in Israel. Yemenite dances, singers with a kipa on their head, the camera does not omit the Israeli public. All this is, practically, unknown in Arhab, in the mufredj of Abdul Warad surrounded by the sheikh’s family. We don’t know how to react.

The afternoon is long, very long. I hesitated a long time about returning to our friends this afternoon: I have a deep desire to see them, knowing that this could be the last time we will be in Beit Sinan. How many times I gazed, through the little window (on the door of our mufredj) and through which we could see our friends’ house! How many times, on the balcony, did I gaze in the direction of their house which is just a few meters below the sheikh’s house. And to think that they waited for us for Shabbat lunch and Abdul Quasser, who knew this, never informed us. I chomp at the bit all afternoon. Fortunately Myriam is there to prevent me from going. I am dying to go there.

Sunday Youm el Arad is souk day<div class="note"></div> in Beil el Aifa. We are in the courtyard at 8 as instructed by Abdul Quasser last night. Clearly, he has not yet woken up. He opens his shutters, it is 9 o’clock. “Sbah al rher!” Sbah al nur. The drivers warm up the engines of the Toyotas. A “Qabili” is slitting a lamb’s throat in the courtyard; our sheikhs are expecting today distinguished guests, also from Arhab, with whom they will leave tomorrow for a few days to sort out some problems. The souk has changed a lot, instead of a real souk, it’s a “car souk”; everyone has laid out their merchandise in front of their cars. We meet people from Sinan. We meet our friends with their children. They have come to the souk to sell the skins they prepared. They clearly have no desire to meet us in this environment which they must feel as hostile. We too do not feel at ease. Only little Yaya, Amram’s son, comes over to say hello.

The souk is an opportunity for every Qabili to bring his problems to the sheikh… We have great difficulty returning to Beit Sinan. Back in Sinan. The guests are here. They have been invited into the mufredj. They are astonishingly noble. It seems that they are also sheikhs further north in ARHAB. There are 4 of them. There is one whose face I can't forget; it is so beautiful and embodies everything one imagines when one thinks of the Orient. Afterward, a long photo session: <span class="chrono-link">“The meeting of the sheikhs”</span>, following prayers, it’s time for lunch. Like every day the menu is the same, but we do not complain. We begin with “bint a sarh” followed by several plates of vegetables: zucchinis, beans, okra, sweet potato, cabbage, tomato and pepper condiments. Bread drizzled with melted butter. Meat juice. Rhilba. Meat – RLASS<div class="note"></div>

All this swallowed down in ¼ hour. I only have eyes for the noble face who embodies the Orient and next to whom I am seated <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheet 674 photo number 0)</span>. After the meal, we return to Abdel Quasser’s mufredj with all our sheikhs. I appreciate these moments; I know that we are in the very center of tribal life. Sheikhs visiting one another. Without even knowing well the tribal code – the little we know, we learned from Jean – I can see the importance of each person’s gestures and the place they occupy in the mufredj. There is something fascinating about the warring spirit. After we are offered tea – because those who chew qat don’t drink tea (it dissolves fats), the sheikhs take their rifles which are hanging on the wall of the mufredj and head for the diwan where the qat session is about to begin. Abdul Quasser is always very attentive and doesn't want to leave us alone; he chats a little with us. We talk again about Paris and his future trip with his

brother to visit us. I think this time it's practically certain they will come after Ramadan. Abdul Quasser prays. We leave him and go to our mufredj for a siesta… I had a lot of trouble taking leave of our sheikh on the pretense of going to our mufredj to have a siesta. We lingered 10 minutes on our terrace to make sure our sheikh was in his qat mufredj. Indeed, a few minutes after positioning ourselves on the roof – where one can see everything – we see him heading for the qat mufredj to join his brother and his guests – it’s good, we can go. Shit!!! One of the sheikh's young neighbors, who like most Qabilis has nothing to do, sees me on the terrace and calls out, “Sadik!” I answer him in the same tone; he's standing over there on the plateau above the sheikh's house. He’s not a bad fellow, the “sadik,” but he sticks!! and is oppressive. We have to wait ½ hour for him to enter his home. I think we can go now. What path should we take? Let’s hope that the iron door is open. Above all, this is not our 1st escapade; we mustn’t make any noise on the stairs. Let’s hope we don't bump into anyone, otherwise it's over… And to think they believe we are having a siesta. It’s a real obstacle course… After the stairs, we have to cross the courtyard. Luckily, no one is around and the iron door is open. I dare not look at the windows… We head straight on, our friends' house is not far away. No one seems to have seen us. Except perhaps someone behind a window whom we can't see… We hurry on. I don't want to look back. Phew, we arrive. Yaya is here, he runs to fetch his father, his uncle… and the key to the mufredj, and invites us in.

In Yemen, people go crazy over perfume. Abdul Warad sprays us with 2 or 3 different types of perfume as well as all his guests. There's even one perfume that is so greasy, it leaves huge stains. The sun has set. Myriam and Linda join the women; I go to the diwan which is bathed in smoky darkness. It's the hour when all you can hear is the gurgling noise of the “madars.” I go and sit opposite Abdul Warad, who is conversing with his sheikh guests and seems to be recounting his latest trip to Germany… and his future trip to Paris. For my part, I smoke a madar. I'm enjoying the atmosphere that reigns in the diwan at such a time. I feel good here. The smoke intoxicates me. I'm happy to be here this evening with them. I rarely had such a

feeling…???<div class="note"></div> with a group of qat chewers. I feel good. When I leave, it is night, a night like I saw nowhere else, a starry night like I never dreamt of. I am going to get Myriam to share the experience. How can the sky be full of so many constellations? What a night! This day will remain unforgettable. The trip has begun well, I'm almost tempted to say, too well. Our mufredj – I didn't even talked about it, with its 2 fish hanging on the wall, its little grenade with the pin still in it next to the attaché case and the photos of Abdul Az<div class="note"></div> in Iraq, as well as a photo of Abdul Wasser his father as a young sheikh.

<span class="chrono-link">Today, Sunday, will certainly remain the most intense afternoon spent in the company of our friends</span>… without a single Arab to disturb our intimacy; I can't help thinking about our last visit when we couldn’t even be one minute alone with them. The most intense and the richest too, photographically. Rarely on this trip has the light been so beautiful as during these late afternoons in the mufredj. My eyes were fixed on <span class="chrono-link">Salem as he spun the cotton with which, later, he would make tsitsiot. And the voices of the children studying</span>; all of this remains unforgettable. Seeing me photographing the men studying, <span class="chrono-link">a woman goes and fetches her sewing machine so that she can be photographed in turn</span>… and shows us what she can do. I forgot to mention that we were scolded by the 4 brothers who had specially prepared a Shabbat meal for us… and who waited in vain for us. The sheikh had refrained from telling us this – in short, we had to have yesterday's meal… and liters of tea, grapes… until we exploded. Today, contact sheets 674-675. The sun has already set, and night has begun to fall. We head back as we had promised to come to the qat mufredj. They are chewing their qat; I ruminate on all the photos I just took.

Monday, January 6
We wait and wait, constantly wait. Up early, we wait in the courtyard – the household is still asleep. The qat prevented everyone from falling asleep last night and now they can’t get up. We spend a good two hours waiting in the courtyard with the “drivers” who take good care of us. Nothing here is ever definite; we are going to learn this lesson once again. Our sheikhs, who were meant to leave today for ARHAB to visit the sheikhs who came yesterday, will only leave tomorrow. We lost nearly the entire morning. Other Qabilis have arrived in Sinan, no doubt to talk about their problems. They kill a sheep in the courtyard; it’s Abdul Quasser who kills it. There will, undoubtedly, be a big crowd at the table for lunch.

It is 11. We hear the shutters opening. [...]<!-- The homo, the old satyr, in short “the loser” – it’s the word of the day – has just appeared. ----> As I walk around the house, and pass under a window, garbage falls on my head, because in Sinan, like everywhere in Yemen, garbage is thrown out of the window. Abdul Quasser’s leg hurts this morning. We drive to Beil el Aifa with Abdul Quasser to buy some qat. I take my tension out on a rosary which A.W. gave me. For the last 2 days, we have been treated to two enormous meals and we reach our mufredj with great difficulty. The two enormous meals were – the meal at the sheikh’s house and the meal at our friends’ place. It’s our last day in Beit Sinan and today, too, we will try to get out and see our friends. We cite, as our regular pretext, the indispensable siesta.

????<div class="note"></div>
ballad. In fact, like yesterday, the siesta was no more than a few minutes spent on the terrace, <span class="chrono-link">scanning the horizon from the heights of our mufredj terrace</span>. It is a little earlier than yesterday and we can see the Qabilis making their way from the village to the sheikh’s mufredj with qat under their arms. We are not going to miss our getaway, we don’t have permission (*), but we will successfully overcome all the obstacles that lead to our friends’ house… with a lot of luck. But someone saw us make our way to the Jews today, a Qabili who was lingering close to the school. It won’t be long before he joins us in Suliman’s mufredj, not Amram’s today. I forgot to mention that, during the afternoon that we spent with our friends, Amram told us about forced conversions which seem to have taken place about a year ago: 2 in Ajar and 2 in Amlah. Amlah is not a safe region, he told us, and it will not be prudent to go there. “Us Jews are afraid to go there.” Salem will write on a piece of paper the story of his arrest and how he was beaten, in order to explain the state we found him in during our last visit 2 years ago. He writes this down in Hebrew on a piece of paper. Unfortunately, we hardly understand anything when he reads it to us. He doesn’t want us to take it, he is afraid. The Qabili clearly saw us head towards the house of the Jews and he soon joined us… And we couldn’t help thinking about the same situation 2 years ago. Sitting with us in the mufredj, he doesn’t want to leave. I leave the mudfredj and urge Myriam and Linda to follow me as we must get rid of him at all cost. We pretend that we want to see the <span class="chrono-link">women making their basketry</span>. So I have to take some photos. Contact sheet 679.

Monday, January 7
I shoot a portrait of our Qabili… and finally he decides to leave. So we return to the mufredj and there our family presents us with the most beautiful of spectacles: that of the study. Amram, the Mori<div class="note"></div> treats us as witnesses and gazes at us as he chants the text, as though to signal us that we are one of them. The light dims in the mufredj and there are probably just a few minutes left before sunset… And to think, I wanted so much to take a <span class="chrono-link">picture of the 4 brothers</span>. I beg Amram to kindly agree and ask his brothers also to agree… Finally he agrees. Quick! Quick! Quick! I shout, just time enough to click away in black and white, then in color, and the sun has gone. <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheets 679-680)</span> Just like last night, the sheikh must be waiting for us in his mufredj and we have to leave if we don’t want to arouse any suspicion. It’s time for farewells; “our friends” know that we leave tomorrow at dawn. We promise to send them mezuzot and megillot… via Jean. We would like to promise that we will return, it is our dearest wish… at Succot. Be ezrat Hashem. End.

Tuesday, January 8th
Sunrise in Beit Sinan is an unforgettable, indescribable… spectacle. When will we return to these places? Is it written that we shall return here? Must we live each moment as though it is the first and last time? There is a thirst to capture, retain by writing, by photographing, but everything eludes us irretrievably. 6 days spent in Beit Sinan. Authentic, privileged moments, we don't know what dimension they will hold in our memory. We are only at the beginning of this trip which has begun so wonderfully well. We pack our bags in our mufredj and go down to the courtyard for breakfast. I promise myself that I won’t eat anything the rest of the day. Barely awake, A. Warad and Quasser have come down to have breakfast with us. Then it's time for thanks and hugs. “Muslah” will drive us till

???? ???? ????<div class="note"></div> Our 2 sheikhs, the one as fat as the other is thin, wave their hands. We do the same. The car turns round, our stay in Sinan is ending. At Beit el Aïfa, a cab is waiting… full of dust… (nothing like velvet covers for dust!). We get in. He takes on 2 more passengers and drives off. On the road, when a car overtakes us, the windscreen shatters; the driver stops and drives off again. Slowly the “puzzle windscreen” falls apart. The scene is UNIQUE! We arrive in Sanaa frozen. We head straight for Jean's house. Fortunately he is at home, and we tell him all about our stay. Phone call to Mr. the ambassador who gives me an appointment in one hour. We decide to go to Sam City to have a good shower

and sleep in a nice bed with nice sheets. But it’s a pipedream… Sam City is not what it used to be… Once the finest hotel in town, that's all in the past. Yes, there’s still the view from the restaurant, a breathtaking view of the old city… apart from that, the room is not worth 230 riyals. We stroll round the old city and enter through Babel Yemen. SANAA has got more and more dirty. We take our laundry to the Muslim Brother not far from the mosque on September 26th Street, on Jean's recommendation. I forgot to mention our meeting with Mr. the ambassador. I'll talk about that later. We watch the sunset – from the 5th floor of Sam City – overlooking the old city.

?????????????????<div class="note"></div> Around 19:30 Pascal is here. We give him some letters. He leaves tomorrow for Paris. Then we go and have a bite… fish. We drop by Jean’s place to pick up a few things before going to our hotel. A car with a yellow license plate is parked outside with a driver inside. I am surprised. Jean is too. He looks worried as this is something unusual. And at 11, SANAA is asleep. Jean accompanies us back to the cinema and leaves us. We walk on to the Sam. The car, that was parked outside Jean’s place, appears to have followed us. It’s moving slowly, passes us and parks a little further on. My eyes are fixed on the number plate: 47041. I can only think about this number and I imagine the worst scenarios. We arrive at the Sam. The car does not seem to have followed us… Mut it is too late… My mind is already imagining the craziest things…

Wednesday
Nightmarish night. I was tortured by the number 47041. I couldn’t fall asleep. The thought that this car could have followed us made me tremble all night. We leave at dawn for Raida<div class="note"></div>. We arrive in Raydah at the gas station. Ali isn’t there. His mother says that he will come back for lunch. She drives us to her house in the center of Raydah. His wife is there, the new, beautiful one. He repudiated the other one. We are invited to sit in the mufredj. Photos of Ali dressed in Western clothes hang on the walls here and there. We spend the whole morning in the mufredj. At noon, we climb up to the terrace. A monkey is playing there, attached to a tight leash. Ali’s house is brand new. It must be just a year old… but it already seems old. Ali returns at around 1 o’clock, we get acquainted. Fortunately, I brought a copy of the letter which Dominique sent him and which he received,

Ali is a very gentle fellow. He doesn’t really look like a Yemenite. Ali seems to have a lot to do. He says that we will leave tomorrow morning for Bani Abd and that, in the time being, we can stroll around on our own in Raydah, which is what we do. At around 5, he takes us to see his plantations; he has just bought a water pump to irrigate his land. He is proud to show us how he was able to make a desert arable. Small snack at 7:00. The news in English at 7:30… always with music… and the weather forecast at the end of the news broadcast. “And now lady & gentleman, we come to the end of the news.” The female newscaster has a cold. The show was worth the trip.

We go to bed very early, exhausted. Ali’s house is situated exactly opposite the alleyway that leads to the Jewish homes. In Ali’s mufredj, we have a front-row seat enabling us to watch the parade of Jews of Raydah. I have to admit that I dare not set foot outside, in Raydah, until Ali is back even though we would much rather go visit the Jews than sit here waiting in the mufredj… and it is cold. After Ali returns and following breakfast, it is Ali who suggests that we go see the Jews, as Myriam has the habit of doing, he wants to talk about Dominique Champo. We leave, accompanied by the daughter of Ali’s brother. The welcome is rather cool, we pretend that we want to see the jewelry. I recognize a kid from Ajar who’s all grown up. He’s the one in the foreground of the photo in the forge… He tells us that he got married three years ago to a girl from Raydah… and he must return to Ajar. Yom Ouarad. We chat, and try to get ourselves invited but to no avail… and it’s for the best; I must confess that Raydah and its surroundings do not reassure me. Before leaving, we encounter a Jew who is carrying trousers, glasses and speaks English. Incredible but true… And he goes to the Raydah school and studies with the other Muslims.

Thursday
Departure for Bani Abd at 9 o’clock. We fill up the car. Ali asks for 140 riyals. I am stunned for a moment, then I realize that we have to pay for the gas… and the meal that was served to us alone with spoons. I will have to ask Dominique when I get back to Paris. The road to Bani Abd is very beautiful… but not very safe: that’s what Ali seems to say and he explains that the road we are going to take (there is another one that is safer but less beautiful) is on the border with Baquil and Ashed. We cross Derbhain, then Al Madrad, another village, and then we arrive in Bani Abd. It’s a 2 hour drive. The arrival in Bani Abd is extraordinary. I’m at no loss for photos.

We run into someone on the road who tells Ali that there’s been a fatality in Bani Abd and that the Asheds blew up the only water pump in the village. Tonight Mohammed will give us a detailed explanation about the power struggle between the Baquils and the Asheds. What is unheard of is that these two confederations are not drawn up on either side of a line but are instead intermingled: Baquil, Ashed, Baquil, Ashed, Baquil… I don’t quite know how, but Mohammed began to talk about Arhab and our friends Abdul WARAB, the one we never saw… and who is, currently, in prison with other heads of the Baquil and Ashed tribes, as well as Abdul WARAD and Quasser in glowing terms. They are able to place 10,000 men on a war footing in a few hours, he added admiringly.

This morning, Mohammed takes us to visit his lands and shows us the springs which he just developed and which will irrigate future cultivations of qat, potatoes and sorghum. From the beginning of this trip, I realized to what extent water is life itself – by the hours of walking needed to find it, by the difficulty in getting fresh supplies of water, and wood too. Each action acquires added significance. The lives of these men and women are radically different firstly because the space is different, and so is time. Their time, so distant from ours… The valley which stretches out below Bani Abd is splendid with its terraces, shades of ochre, yellow and white. The color of a land that is thirsty. This grandiose landscape, with its villages which one glimpses in the distance, perched on mountain ridges, these houses built

As soon as we arrive in Bani Abd, in the late morning, Ali suggests we go visit the Jews. But, first, he takes us to see the plantations of his brother Mohammed and the springs which they just developed for irrigation. Ali has a lot to do because of the incident with the water pump and advises us to go and see the Jews. We do so, escorted by an elderly Qabili. We are first welcomed by <span class="chrono-link">Suliman who shows us his workshop</span>. He is a carpenter and has just bought an electric machine imported from Italy in order to saw, plane, etc. A few women have come to the workshop and observe us: they invite us up to the mufredj to drink tea. On the stairs leading up to the mufredj, we hear the voice of a child who seems to be chanting a melody in Hebrew. I quietly enter the mufredj in order not to disturb <span class="chrono-link">the child who is studying with his grandfather</span> and is following the text with the help of a Yad<div class="note"></div>. It’s a wonderful scene, the faces of the child and grandfather are unforgettable. Myrian and Linda follow me and distract the Qabilis who also followed us. Then the wife of

?????<div class="note"></div>
photos of Dominique Champo.
<span class="chrono-link">Family portrait (contact sheet 681, photos 22-23)</span>. The grandfather is a tanner. Suliman is a carpenter, and his brother makes plaster windows for stained glass.
After lunch at Ali’s place, we decide to return to our friends to see if we can be alone with them. In fact, once there, they ask us questions which put us ill at ease. We had thought things over, and had decided not to reveal our true identity simply because we would not be staying here long enough and, given the limited photographic interest they represent in my project, I preferred not to take needless risks. But Myriam made the mistake of answering “Lazem”, one must, when Suliman asked her if we eat the meat of Muslims. Unless he is stupid, which I am sure he isn’t, Suliman must certainly have understood who we are. All the more so when he later read, in front of Myriam, a text in Hebrew in one of the pamphlets distributed by Neturei Karta.

Friday 10
Up very early, with the sun. Went to the far end of the village. Up the wadi by way of the ridge. Stunning view of a landscape only to be found in your dreams. Magnificent scenery, pastel colors, terraces, patchworks, ridges emerging from the clouds. I contemplate this scenery. I snap off a roll of film… to complete…
We walk 2 good hours. Back for a country breakfast “milk + BizBaz”. Mohammed and Ali are here; Ali seems to have changed his plans. He had come to accompany us and was due to return to Raydah yesterday.
But with problems here… he has decided to return tomorrow evening. We spend our morning gleaning, here and there (while doing a tour of the village), <span class="chrono-link">old wooden keys</span> which women wear around their heads and which fall on their shoulders. Until today, I didn’t know about the existence of these wooden keys.

As it happens, we picked up a dozen.
[Here are 2 drawings, front and profile, of the wooden keys he is talking about].
We also watched the production of one of these keys, in half an hour with incredible skill.
<span class="chrono-link">(I photographed the different stages of production)</span>.
Lunch at around 14h. We spend the afternoon on the roof of the house in the sunshine, in the fresh air. This is a real health trip. A few women came to join us on the roof to chat. They offer us a small bunch of herbs whose scent extends from one end

of the roof to the other. Sunset. Spectacle. The sun sets almost one hour later than in Raydah or Beit Sinan. Here we are 3000 m. above everything… It’s like being in a plane, says Linda… which is true… Let’s go to our mufredj. It’s cool. We plan to leave tomorrow at dawn. Today, Friday night, we end the evening in the mufredj with Mohammed, Ali and the others who are unusual “after qat” since they talk, talk, talk. We talk about wooden keys, iron keys and “marlaquess” – a wooden system in which the key is inserted. Since we spent too much time this morning with our friends, we daren’t return this afternoon. We spend a good part of the evening in the mufredj with Ali, Mohammed and… Suliman the Jew who came to

Saturday
“Lazem – get up” – this is how, awakened by the sun which penetrates our mufredj, I intend to wake up Myriam and Linda with joy and good humor. Sunrise and sunset from the roof of Mohammed’s house. Unforgettable sight. The horizon is very clear this morning. Off in the distance, quite far away, one can see the successive mountain ranges. Let’s pack our bags. Breakfast on the terrace. Ali and Mohammed got up early. An elderly Qabili has arrived with keys and “marlaquess” which he dismantled from the doors of his house. We buy. Ali stops a truck which is heading for Raydah. We take the Baquil road to return to Raydah. The road is better. 1 ¼ hour drive. When we reach Raydah we jump into a private car which serves as a cab. Abdalah, the driver, turns out to be

a friend of Afif, alias Marceau Gasse. We certainly heard a lot of talk about Afif and Myriam during this stay in Bani Abd… SANAA, SANAA, SANAA. He takes us to Jean’s home… who isn’t there. We decide to return to Sam City and leave tomorrow for the North. Time enough to have a good shower; we are dusty and filthy. We call Jean. He is at home and tells us to come and see him. We first go to “Muslim Brothers Wash Whiter”. I am proud of my new slogan. We collect our laundry. Sorry, Myriam collected it an hour ago and forgot my trousers. It’s an occasion for a good fight… Reunion with Jean, the old rat. We spend the afternoon between the mufredj and his room. Listening to Simone Tamar,

a superb singer from Constantine (Algeria)!!! Let’s get the stuff we need for the next week, the minimum in keeping with our motto to “travel light” and since this is the time for slogans, the last one of the day is “harlan wa sarhlan”, the translation of which I love: “family and ease”. We bought more perfumes for the home stretch and the last posters to give as gifts. I watch the sunset from the roof of Jean’s place: between 5h and 5:07 p.m., Pascal had said. It’s certainly the most beautiful view one can have of Sanaa. Then I redescend to the mufredj and watch the light fade, fade and it’s so many different Sanaas that parade before me as the light fades. This city is too real to be true… It is more like a theater decor. <span class="chrono-link">SANAA is a dream…</span>

Dinner with Jean. Chai, relieb + foul. The phone rings. Raph is on the line, It’s good to talk to him. In the waiting room, a kid with the evening paper calls out the headlines as he passes between the benches.
Al Yahudi, Al Yahudi <div class="note"></div>, he cries out in the hall where the Yemenites await their phone call. One Yemenite calls the kid over and buys a paper. It’s hard to make the picture out… I think I catch a glimpse of Jews with sidelocks on the front page. Did something happen in the North, are there problems?… We are in the dark, since we don’t read Arabic. We do not want to call Jean and bother him for this, but I am curious to know what happened. We’ll never know. And we are leaving tomorrow for the North.

Sunday 12
The last stretch. Slept badly in Sanaa. The muezzin<div class="note"></div> wakes us up at 4 in the morning. I find it hard to sleep. My mind is working, is enjoying some game or other, imagines, projects, is delirious… After Myriam, it’s my turn to feel itchy. Am I nervous… or could it be too much dust, too much dirt? 9 o’clock. We set off to take a stroll around Tahrir (square) in the hope of finding a newspaper… But, unfortunately, they are all three days’ old. We go to the post office to buy some stamps. We return to Sam City, take our backpacks full of perfumes and other presents, posters, framed pictures, in short, all the stuff we need for our trip to the North, the last stretch of this trip. Hassabah Hassabah Hassabah Saada Saada Saada!! The taxi drivers cry out their destinations… Amram, Ajjah, Raydah.

We find a taxi but it needs 2 more passengers to be full. 2 people are late in coming and we wait one hour before leaving… One person still hasn’t turned up and the driver does not want to leave. Seeing that the taxi is not ready to leave, two passengers ask for their money back… Finally, the last person arrives. We can go. I forgot to mention that, since we like to travel comfortably and having past experience, we paid for the 4th person’s place so that we are just 3 on our bench. 80 riyals/person. The crew is quite friendly. After an hour on the road, the driver wants to stop in Raydah to eat; I complain, firstly because I’m not hungry and because I don’t want to stop in Raydah… We stop in Rhammer, half an hour further on.
<<
¼ hour stop, time to eat a good foul… and then set off again. The checkpoints are more numerous than in the past and the checks stricter. We had to abandon half of our photocopies (6). The checkpoints are so extensive that 30 kilometers before Saada, the car is stopped and all the men are searched. A soldier seems to ask one man if he has any hidden mollah, other than what he found already. The man replies “oualah” and points his finger to the sky. This fellow, as well as his neighbor in front, will continue with us to Saada. 2 of the 3 passengers in the back are judged too suspicious and are detained at the checkpoint. The car leaves without them. After a long drive across an arid landscape covered in dust, such is the strength of today’s wind, the last 50 kilometers leading to Saada are truly extraordinary,

With their earthen buildings. After a long absence, we are once again in Saada. Where do we go to first? And where do we do afterwards? Those are the two questions that have been on my mind ever since we planned our trip to the North. Did Cheyef receive our message? Is he in Saada or is he with his family in Raolan since he is called “Cheyef el Raolani”? The taxi arrives in Saada and leaves us at the former Chinese El Rharban hotel, now Yemenite-Somali. We have extraordinary luck. At the very moment our taxi stops in front of the hotel and as we unload our baggage, another car stops and out come Mahdi<div class="note"></div> and Cheyef – I can’t believe it. Reunion. Hugs.

They let us settle in and return 1 hour later. We invite them to our room. We tell them why John was unable to accompany us. We get out the poster, album, and other photos. We inquire about the family, the village, the sheikh of whom Cheyef is – or rather was – the bodyguard. He lives secluded in the mountains for the last few months after having killed two policemen. The current score is 2 to 2. Cheyef tells us that he is now working for the police: his brother also, as a driver. Cheyef and Mahdi invite us to eat a mutton stew. Linda seems to make a face and her flu doesn’t help. Cheyef tells us that his wife gave birth to a little girl 7 days ago. He suggests that Myriam and Linda should stop by tomorrow morning before leaving for the village. Ah, yes, I forgot to say

that ????????<div class="note"></div>
Cheyef and Mahdi negotiated very quickly our departure tomorrow morning for Haidan<div class="note"></div>. They are truly helpful because, in the course of our discussion, we learn that they just returned this morning from Haidan. We chat, as we eat our mutton dish, when suddenly a man offers us some djambias… I look up… it’s our fellow from Nashuan. I look at Myriam who nods in agreement; There is no doubt about it, it is him… and he did not recognize us. We make the appointment for tomorrow morning “Badril” at 7 o’clock. Myriam and Linda will go to say hello to the women, then we will leave for Haidan. We are back in Saada, in our Chinese fondouk<div class="note"></div> which is now Yemenite-Somali… The sheets are as clean as ever, just as Jean wrote to me

in his letter. Our friends, Cheyef, Mahdi, and the others tomorrow and the following days. I never imagined such a return, such reunions. Our trip to the North could not have begun better.
God, what fright we had when the soldier began to search the Qabilis… and if he had decided to search us too, with our mezuzot?!

Monday
I need an immense amount of courage to pick up my pen and retrace the broad outlines of this bumpy day which led us, after a few long hours on a difficult road, <span class="chrono-link">to Ajars</span>… to our FILTHY mufredj which we found again after a 2 year absence. We left this morning at around 9:30 after Myriam and Linda visited the wives of Cheyef, Saleh<div class="note"></div>, etc.
We drive around Saada for a good hour for whatever reasons, I don’t know, then we leave Saada. We take the direct road to Sagayn. 10 minutes later, we stop to load 750 kg of cement and wheat. Mahdi is driving. Linda and Myriam are in the front. Cheyef, Facher, and I behind in the pick-up. In the sun… and dust. The route is very beautiful, often very arid and rocky. Sometimes we drive for an entire hour without seeing a single house. The sand is pink, the stones black, shrubby vegetation that is vaguely steppe-like.

until Sagayn, it’s essentially earthen architecture… superb, but sadly, increasingly damaged by cinderblock and concrete restorations… not to mention all the new cinderblock constructions.
In Sagayn, we meet Yaya’s brother to whom we give a photo. We ask him to tell his brother that we will pass by in 2 days to spend 2 days with him – “arhlan wa sarhlan”, he hastens to reply – 3, 4 days, 1 week if you wish. The drive is long, it never seemed to me to be so long. We left Saada at 9:30 this morning and we arrive in Haidan at 16:00. We didn’t take the usual route, we bypassed Ajar, passed through the valley below the village, and drove straight to Haidan where Cheyef insisted we have some refreshments.

Arrival in Haidan, in the village square opposite the police “fort”. We sit on the terrace of the fondouk. Mahdi orders something to eat. Cheyef closes up the car. Suddenly, in the fraction of a second, I don’t know how it happened, Cheyef is held up by a machine gun a few meters from where we are. Mahdi runs to his rescue with Cheyef’s machine gun, pointing it at the stomach of the guy who was threatening him. Facher is in the grip of another guy. The entire episode will last 30 seconds. Quickly, children and men crowd into the village square to see what is happening. I was really scared. Mahdi did not have a permit to carry a machine gun, that’s at least what I understood. And who do we suddenly catch sight of in a car? Hussein, our friend Hussein. He comes toward us and gets out of the car. Hugs. Wonderful reunion. In the village, when we arrive, the sun won’t

The sun won’t be around much longer. Jewish women are sitting in front of the house making basketry; unfortunately, I cannot photograph them straight away, we must first greet them, and, in so doing, I will necessarily miss the photograph. The sun sets. Dozens of children escort us into the village; it’s impossible to take a photo – yes, one photo of our arrival. We are exhausted by the trip, which took almost the whole day. Our mufredj stinks, the word is not an exaggeration. It stinks of rancid butter. The blankets are as filthy as can be and smell foul. There are the ever-present plastic flowers on the shelf… You feel so dirty here. Furthermore, the electricity doesn’t work, and we are given oil lamps.

So why did we continue onto Haidan without stopping in Ajar? It was worth it to travel in Cheyef’s car! And to think that we wanted to avoid being seen at all costs in Haidan… Well, we failed. Then there was the police stunt with Mahdi, Cheyef, and Facher, all of Haidan was there in the village square opposite the police fort. On this late afternoon, impossible to take photographs in Ajar, so wonderful <span class="chrono-link">the welcome given us by Jews and Muslims</span>. “Myriam” and “Frédéric” are all over the place; we're followed by a horde, we greet here and there. Yousef Schtari<div class="note"></div>, Jeradi<div class="note"></div>, old Daoud, young Lewi who hasn’t changed much. Photos 13, 15, 16 contact sheet 684 capture the atmosphere in Ajar on this late afternoon of Monday the 13th. I am furious at having missed the Jewish women doing their basketry at the entrance to the village. It’s, of course, impossible to be alone with our friends. Jerhadi tells me to come to his home tonight after dark. Unfortunately, it will not be possible. As from tomorrow, we have to get rid of our mezuzot as quickly as possible.

Tuesday 14
In a few hours it will be 27 years since I was born. The day was too long and tiring, rhythmically, because the secret here is to go with the flow. It’s like bumps on a ski slope or, even better, a slalom in which 100 participants already ran and, if you are the 101st and you want to win, you have no choice but to let yourself be swept along in tracks that are too deep, at the risk of being chucked out of the slalom if you don’t know how to deal with the trenches. Up very early; woken up several times during the night by dogs howling. It is 7 o’clock when we set foot outside, the sun had barely risen. The household is already awake. Mahdi, Abdalah… We wanted to stroll round the village as it wakes up, but we had hardly

set foot outside when Cheyef calls out to us from the roof of the neighboring house, to say hello and invite us to have breakfast in his mufredj which he shares with Saleh… Infinitely cleaner than ours. The series of “on-demand” photos began very early this morning with those who will remain our best clients: Mahdi, Abdalah, Saleh and Sheïef… who each in turn want to be photographed with Myriam… and Linda, whom everyone covets. Then we spend the morning going from one workshop to another, from one house to another, most of the time Myriam is with Linda and I am alone. We stop by the spring, always followed by our escort. God, how the blankets on me are greasy and stink as I write these lines in the light of the oil lamp. The morning passes very quickly. We meet one-eyed Jamil who works with leather and whose shop was closed this morning.

????????<div class="note"></div> to kindly open his shop so that I can photograph him. I will buy 2 wineskins from him. Myriam and Linda, in the meantime, spend more than a bit buying jewelry. They spend an infinite amount of time in J.R.’s workshop. We go take a look at the forge. The blacksmith is still there, the children are not studying today. The scrap metal is stored in such a way that it would be impossible to redo the forge. Anyway, I had no intention of photographing this place again. Outside the forge, a woman goes past – I recognize her, I photographed her last time – who is <span class="chrono-link">carrying a heavy load of sticks on her back</span>… It’s only later in the evening that I will realize it is J.R.’s mother. Lunch – Around 2 p.m., we leave for Fauth.

Tuesday 14
I manage to escape for a moment from Yousef Chtari’s mufredj to go say good evening to Losay & Rhoursan. A little Qabili, or Abdalah, Mahdi’s brother follows me but Losay refuses to let him enter and does not hesitate to dismiss the little Qabilis and Jews who also try to enter. In the mufredj, I find Losay, Hoursan, Haim who returned from Saada today and there is also the Jew who lives in the house at the entrance to the village. I hear Myriam cry out to me, from Youssef Chtari’s mufredj, to return but I linger and tell those who are there with me in the mufredj, how much we would like to bring them more books and mezuzot but I explain to them the risks and the military checkpoints on the road from SANAA to Saada and they seem to understand perfectly. I ask them if they heard the latest news from Rome and Vienna (of course not, stupid). On the other hand, they heard about the destruction of the PLO headquarters in Tunis and Operation Moses. I tell them that I met, in Israel, Daoud Sabari’s daughter. They are amazed. They would like to ask me more questions. I would like to speak to them for hours. I promise that I will leave them some mezuzot or books in Beit Sinan with the Mori. I explain that we have developed very important ties with sheikh Sinan.

We bungled our outing this morning. But could we get up any earlier? The sun had not yet risen. After quietly leaving our mufredj and going down the stairs, we thought that we would be able to spend a few moments at J.R.’s place before the village awoke but as soon as we were on the path to his house a voice called out to us; it was Cheyef inviting us to have breakfast in his mufredj. Damn it. We filled our bags with presents to distribute to “our friends” and we can’t wait to hand them out… and give away our mezuzot. Today, I bless Jean for having pushed us to take these mezuzot. Because our credibility was at stake, a credibility which we would have lost forever had we not taken this little risk. After a good hour spent eating breakfast and taking <span class="chrono-link">“on-demand” photos</span>, we manage to impose our desire to go buy some jewelry. Myriam and Linda would walk behind with Mahdi in order to slow things down and I would go as quickly as possible to Jerhadi’s forge to give him the mezuzah. A few minutes later, Linda, Myriam, and a horde join me. I had just enough time to ask J.R. if everything was going well for the Jews in Ajar. “Everything is going very, very well. We are happy here.” I can’t help thinking about those 2 hours spent in the pick-up the next day on the way to Sagayn. “Rhouf, rhouf, rhouh,” he kept repeating, as he surveyed the pitch of his voice and the sound of the engine. Rarely have I seen such agility of mind, such finesse in a human being as in J.R. A true CHAMELEON. Myriam and Linda take over at J.R.’s and I take the opportunity of slipping off on my own to Yousef Chtari’s house. I give a mezuzah to one of his sons on the stairs, then they invite me into the mufredj.

???????<div class="note"></div>
The children are studying. Beautiful scene <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheet 684, photos 19 to 27)</span>. Yaya Faez, the grand old man, is on the terrace. I take a portrait of him surrounded by all his grandchildren and great-grandchildren <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheet 687, photos 1 to 6)</span>. Fortunately, Myriam and Linda are there to divert attention from me. I hear her call me and go out onto the terrace of Youssef Chtari, I see her at the window of Losay’s mufredj. I don’t remember exactly when, during that morning, but I found time to give my last mezuzah to old Daoud. His son, who was present, also wanted one but I explained to him the difficulty we had bringing them and he seemed to understand. Next to old Daoud’s workshop is <span class="chrono-link">the workshop of “Jamil” the tanner</span> whom they had gone looking for. I buy 2 wineskins from him and watch them being made. For the first one, I negotiate a price of 150 riyals, and for the second, bigger one, a price of 90. He can’t be making many wineskins these days, poor Jamil, given the Yemenites’ taste for plastic cans… which must be more practical. (Photo of Jamil’s workshop, contact sheets 685 & 686) We leave in the afternoon for Fauth. In the pick-up we sing to the tune of “Gata Gata” and suddenly Abdalah begins to sing “Adonai Bene Israel” in the accent of our friends. I look at him, without seeming too surprised, and he explains that this is what al Yaoud sing when they study. I am astounded to see, to hear this from the mouth of Abdalah. We spend the evening going from mufredj to mufredj – visiting exclusively our friends. Our Muslims seem to appreciate their company and we have the impression that, if they did not exist, they would invent them. But it’s impossible to be alone with our friends this evening.

Wednesday, January 15 It’s my birthday. At the time of writing these lines, we are ensconced, after having arrived at our next stopover, Sagayn, in the late afternoon, in a luxurious mufredj in the house of the police chief. After Cheyef’s mufredj, it would have been impossible to find something dirtier. Our new lodging is therefore a relative blessing, which we appreciate… for the time being… and we have the hammam<div class="note"></div> on the doorstep – what the hell!!! We think about Maurice and Stella who left today for India. Tiring day. Got up very early around 6. Today is souk<div class="note"></div> day in Haidan and all those who go there to sell their merchandise must arrive very early if they want to get a good spot.

In order to have breakfast with J.R. we had to get up at dawn. The village was practically deserted. A few women and children remained in the village. We went from house to house. Mahdi left us for a moment to accompany his mother to the souk. We stopped at Losay’s place. The women were putting makeup on Linda & Myriam. Mahdi came to fetch us late morning. We returned to the souk with Mahdi. Stayed barely 20 minutes, time enough to bargain and buy a few stone plates. We left soon after and ran into the fellow from Nashuan who, this time, recognized us and asked for his photo. We return to the village, the weather is getting overcast. Photograph of J.R.’s mother preparing dough for the rhourh.

Photograph of J.R.’s mother making a wicker basket. We then wait around for almost an hour on the roof of Mahdi’s house, as he comes and goes for some reason or other… which makes me nervous. My “epidermal reaction” is back. Finally, we have lunch. It is nearly 2 o’clock. Saleh, “old Saleh” is waiting in his car and honking his horn. His pick-up is half full with qat. He has loaded 2 Qabilis who will sit in the front. Myriam, Linda and I and our luggage… and God knows if we are loaded with picture frames, perfumes, posters and those stone dishes we just bought… and those wicker baskets which were given to us. The weather has become so cloudy that we can’t see further than 10 meters.

???????<div class="note"></div> could never have imagined such weather in Yemen. It lasts perhaps ¼ of an hour then, in the other valley, it’s once again beautiful… without a cloud. We drive down to the Sagayn valley. I had been waiting for this since my first trip… Well, I got my photo in an ideal light: in winter, at sunset. Saleh has to stop a few times to let me shoot. He’s not too friendly. He even has the cheek to ask us for money for driving us to Sagayn in his pick-up, we were so badly seated with the little space left to us due to his load of qat. 100 riyals.

We arrive in Sagayn. Yaha is not there but in Sanaa. Will be back tomorrow or after tomorrow. No one knows. We ask to be taken to his house. We arrive first at the women’s house. There is no room for us. We are taken to the father’s house – which is in fact where we slept 2 years ago. So here it’s “arhlan wa sarhlan,” tea and conversation with one of the father’s sons. It’s Gassem. We spend nearly 3 hours in the mufredj exchanging a few words interspersed with long silences. It would be nice to be alone sometimes, to read, think or sleep… but we are in Yemen. One of the sons appears. He wishes us “arhlan wa sarhlan” and asks us if we have our passports… We show him our “roadmap.” He seems very proud.

to show us that he works for the “BOLICE.” Before we go to bed, the father appears. We are pleased to see him again. He talks, as always, with his hands. Like every night, we cover ourselves in Nivea cream.
break
We got up while it was still dark… and went out at daybreak. It is 6:30 when we arrive at Jerhadi’s house which is already awake. We arrived alone, without an escort. J.R. invites us into the mufredj. Narhla brings tea, coffee and a stone jar with milk and butter in which we later break an egg which will cook thanks to the heat of the stone. EXQUISITE. Jerhadi is visibly delighted to have us as guests this morning… especially without Mahdi, Abdalah and all the gang. In effect, for the first time since our arrival in Ajar, we are able to spend ½ an hour alone. He hurries to let us know what he would like us to bring him on our next visit: small prayer books for the holidays and a Megilla<div class="note"></div>. We tell him how much we would have liked to have visited him more often alone but it was impossible. It is time for Jerhadi to go to the souk, otherwise the best spots will get taken. Everyone in the village is preparing to go to the souk. I have time, however, to do a series of portraits of children and women who will only go to the souk later or sometimes not at all. <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheets 689-690-691)</span>

I photograph Jerhadi’s mother who prepares the dough for the rhourh <span class="chrono-link">(contact sheet 691, photos 17 to 27)</span> and who will later make basketry specially for a photo <span class="chrono-link">(photos 29 to 33)</span>. I have no desire to go to the souk. I have to admit that I am scared of going… but we are obliged to follow Mahdi who would not understand why we didn’t. I succeeded in escaping to go to the hammam and since Mahdi’s mother wanted to get to the souk as quickly as possible, so Mahdi has left without us, which allowed us 2 hours more with “our friends” or, at least, those who remained. We had a nice time in Losay’s mufredj with other Jewish women from neighboring houses, all alone, without Mahdi or Abdalah. Haim Faez’s former wife gives us the names of her 2 brothers in Israel. She has tears in her eyes as she watches us read in Hebrew and hears that we have visited Israel. <span class="chrono-link">(Photo with the women, contact sheet 691, photos 6 to 16)</span>
Around 11 o’clock, we leave for the souk. Mahdi has come to fetch us with Hoursan’s brother. We remain as little as possible in Haidan, we really do not want to be noticed. We go straight to see the display of stone plates, we buy 3 superb cooking pots for meat (300 riyals). We pass in front of one-eyed Jamil who is selling his leather goods (wineskins, a large gourd which serves as a churn to make butter, etc.). What a shame I can’t take any pictures. I am afraid of attracting attention.

The other Jews ???????<div class="note"></div> huddled together against the wall as in previous years. We want to leave as quickly as possible and we ask Mahdi to find us a car. He asks one of his friends to take us back. The fellow from Nashuan noticed us. Myriam, he shouts, and my photo do you have it? We will give it to Cheyef, we tell him and bid goodbye… Phew! We head back to Ajar. I admit I was scared waiting so long on the roof of Mahdi’s house for someone to serve us lunch. Mahdi did not stop chatting with a Qabili friend at a distance from us and left 2 or 3 times in the space of ½ an hour, borrowing the car to go who knows where. He had a poker face and I imagined the worst… Saleh kept honking. I was super nervous, I wanted to leave as quickly as possible. The sky was terribly overcast and we were going to travel in a thick fog for a good hour and a half. I will never forget that trip in the pick-up in which Jerhadi joined us because of the El Rhamiss souk which he wants to attend tomorrow. He asked Saleh to let him off just before Sagayn at Wadi El Rhawalid where he will spend the night with Jews. I already noted this before: Jerhadi is really the most astute of them all; during the 2-hour trip, he was attentive to the sound of the engine and the pitch of his voice, his eyes always on the alert, he kept telling us that “life was rotten in Ajar, no future for us.” He kept repeating “Rhouf, Rhouf, Rhouf, Rhouf” all along the way. When asked about what he thought of the Qabilis, he said that Mahdi, Saleh, Facher were bastards, and the only nice one was Cheyef. He tells us that the sheikh of Saada is good for the Jews. On the road, as we pass by Souk el Tani, he mentions a “miskin” who lives there (1/2 hour from Haidan). He talks about America, his desire to leave, he is scared of speaking about Israel. His face sparkles with intelligence. He truly understood why were there. Farewell full of emotion at Wadi El Whawalid.

Thursday 16
Cries of the Sagayn “muezzins” who answer each other as nowhere else… at the hour of prayer with the light of the setting sun caressing the texture of the tall earthen buildings which we can see from our mufredj. Up early, like every morning, we leave for the El Rhamiss souk in Abdalah’s car, a friend of Gassem. The souk is quite beautiful, one part is still traditional, made of stone and earth… When we arrive, a large number of Qabilis are gathered together to hear the herald who, perched from the top of a wall, asks for donations of money for a family that has just lost one of their members. We find the man from whom we bought the stone jars the day before

in the Haidan souk… and he has the lids which he promised us. We buy a stone dish for 100 riyals. I am writing by the light of the oil lamp and I am dying of sleep. Let’s go see Wadi el Rhawalid which is just 5 minutes from the souk by car. We stroll though the village. Drink tea with a Qabili who welcomes us with “arlan wa sarhlan.” We head back to Sagayn. Arrival in Sagayn. We take the path that leads to an ancient fortress. It was formerly a police station. <span class="chrono-link">Breathtaking view of Sagayn.</span> Gassem is friends with the son of the family that lives in this old fortress. We are invited to visit the site. The view over Sagayn from the top of the tower is astonishing. Again, arlan wa sarhlan, tea and nargila are served and a blanket is laid out for us on the floor.

<span class="chrono-link">The son of the house is terribly handsome</span>, something out of Pasolini’s one thousand and one nights. The smell from the toilets reaches into our room, which is pretty unpleasant. Lunch in our mufredj with Gassem and Saleh. Saleh suggests we go to a neighboring village to buy jewelry after lunch. The father makes an appearance after lunch, we chat a while and then leave. We return late afternoon after a stop at the “chicken factory.” We spend 2-3 long hours in the mufredj after a busy day. It would be nice to be alone, to sleep but how can we get rid of Gassem who is really very nice, We did say that we would have liked to see the wedding but it is 9 o’clock and Gassem

Pains. I don’t want to forget to mention that Linda, among other things, is not at all lively. Too slow, she is unable to fully participate in this trip. Sometimes, I have the impression that she is only here as a spectator. She is not caring enough, a spoiled child… but we love her.
break
We found Jerhadi and other Jews whom we didn’t know in the El Rhamiss souk. In fact, that’s what we came for. We would like to greet Jerhadi and the others warmly and speak to them but, since we are escorted, we greet “our friends” no differently from the others. It is very difficult to take photos in the souk as in any meeting place. I had already experienced this in the Sinan souk and in Haidan. All the Qabilis are watching us. We are the attraction of the moment. I take advantage of the attraction aroused by Myriam and Linda and escape for a moment to photograph two little Jews, sitting in front of their jewelry, but I am mistaken… a Qabili saw me and, when we return to Sagayn, he greets Abdalah and Gassem saying: Ah, yes? he photographed the two little Jews in the souk.

And yet, I was far away, and there were other things in my field of vision… Well, no! He still saw that I photographed the Jews. You have to watch out for Salah, Gassem’s brother. He’s a show-off who wants to play hardball. The way he greeted us yesterday, asking to see our permits, enabled me to understand what kind of an individual we were dealing with. This is why we are somewhat afraid when he himself suggests that we go see the Jews. Is it a trick?
We leave for El Guef. He stops his car in front of Moussa’s house, the only concrete block house in the village. Moussa owns a car and a motorcycle. We enter the mufredj. The father is there and has a superb black turban around his head. Hardly ensconced, we hear the sound of a car revving and then honking. The driver calls Salah, who gets up, takes his qat and runs out of the mufredj… Duty beckons, his chickens… or something else. In short, everything happened so quickly, and we were so paranoid that we think it is a trick on his part to leave us alone with the Jews. So we are going to be alone for quite a while with “new friends” who perhaps heard about us from J.R. or the others.
Here, as in Bani Abd, we are asked about our identity, but we say nothing… But they guessed. Moussa’s old father talks about the Jews of the USSR and their status as prisoners to help us understand their position. I ask Moussa if Salah is a good fellow, and he answers without hesitation: “Arabs are all the same,” even though he does not know me nor my relationship with Salah. I think his answer is courageous.

Friday
Up early. Gassem is not here. He forgot to wake up. He was on duty at the “hospital.” Breakfast in our mufredj. Another breakfast at Abdalah’s who also forgot to wake up. We cross the village square where the souk takes place every Friday. Lots of Qabilis come from hamlets to Sagayn which has an important mosque and they take the opportunity to do some shopping. Salah, the other brother, takes us to his chicken farm. Photos. Yaya has just returned from Sanaa and joins us at the farm. He is really the nicest, not a show-off like Salah. A bit of a joker, simple and intelligent. Photo of the two brothers, in the middle of their chickens. We go for a stroll with Abdalah and Gassem to visit our friends from El Guef: the Jews.

????????<div class="note"></div> It’s noon, the souk is drawing to a close. Yaya is in the village square. Let’s go back. We spend a good hour in the mufredj sipping tea with milk. Yaya goes to the mosque and leaves us in the mufredj with Gassem. After prayers, Yaya comes to take us for lunch at the home of the sheikh of Sagayn… who appears to no longer have any effective power, according to Gassem who cuts a modern figure in this very traditional Qabili community. He talks to us about rock & roll, dance, America, and seems to disdain women who wear the veil, treating them as “Blacks”. Although, Gassem is dressed in European style and does not wear a jambia. A few photos of the sheikh and we take our leave of this noble assemblage. We need to find, as quickly as possible, a car to take us to Saada. Time just enough to pack our stone dishes (made in Razé) and our pottery.

Yaya has found us a car which is waiting in the village square. The landscape on the road to Saada is superb, with the light which becomes softer as dusk approaches. Just before we reach the asphalt road, I take a picture, in one of the villages which we pass through, of a house that I have photographed on each of my visits here. We arrive in Saada. The sun is setting. We take a stroll around the old city. As we exit Babel Yemen, who do we run into?… Incredible but true: the fellow from Nashuan, his mouth full of qat. He seems to be everywhere, this guy. Myriam, Linda and I take a nice shower. We were covered in grime and dust. The Hotel Rharban is a little haven of peace after this long jaunt. Together with Abdalah and Gassem, after our deferential visit with the chickens, we leave for El Guef where we have to pick up the ring which Moussa made for Myriam and we are going to pretend that we

want to see other jewelry. So we go to another house (there are three Jewish houses in El Guef). The children are on the top floor, studying under an awning to protect themselves from the sun. We can hear their voices. The mother is preparing Shabbat. The father is still at the market. We are invited into the house. Abdalah waits for us near the car. The father returns shortly and will show us his “jewels”. Nothing “gadim”<div class="note"></div>, nothing really interesting. What we wanted, in fact, was to see him and his family. Lots of photos, too posed for my liking. A few photos of the mother whose head can be seen against this earthen architecture. I wanted to have a photo of a family in the middle of earthen architecture. I got it.

Saturday 18 It is truly the home stretch. We leave for Amlah – without really knowing whether we will get there. Arrived in Amlah. Dream landscape, earthen architecture, astonishing, palm trees… We leave very early for Saada in order to avoid having Cheyef’s friends, Yaya and the others, who are all there for the souk, drag us to the Al Talehr souk with them. At 7:15 we are on the road that passes through Damage, the road that leads to Amlah. We are going to walk to Dammage, almost a two hour walk… not one car in the direction of Saada-Amlah. But in the other direction, dozens of cars (going to the souk). At the Dammage gas station, the owner is watching out for cars with us (nice guy). We wait till 11:30, from 7:15, for the first car traveling in the direction of Amlah.

First, the guy asks for 500 riyals… Then the owner tells him that we are going to see “Basal” the doctor. He is a friend, he says, I will take you for no charge. He speaks a few words of English. His name: Hassan. It will take a little less than 3 hours – in our grand Toyota saloon – to get to Basal’s house. I forgot to mention the quite extraordinary landscape. First it was lunar around Djebel Barrach and almost until Rharir<div class="note"></div>, then as you enter the wadi, there are pockets of houses, palm trees, a dreamlike setting. Arrival at Basal’s house… We honk, his wife, or rather his wife behind a veil bends over the balcony of the new concrete building. Basal is not at home, he has gone to see his ailing father in Najran. He may be back tomorrow, after tomorrow, God knows. The welcome

is not really arhlan wa sarhlan. But we are brought tea… And, after a short discussion, we are asked to bring in our luggage and shown our room, which is the hospital room of the house. I say room because there are two beds and… a door leading to a hammam with a sink and shower… Here, at the other end of the world… Which takes away part of the charm, exoticism. We wait an hour for breakfast… Here periods of idle time (as in all Yemen and God knows that they have them) are insupportable. By the time we sit at the table, it’s 4 o’clock. Hassan has stayed to eat and will left after saying goodbye to us. For our part, we find a lift so we can take the posters to our sheikh. The father has got older and seems a little deaf but pleased with the photo. One of the sons welcomes us with tea. He is with 3 of his brothers…

Very pleased with the photo. I take more. So that I have something to give them next time. The sun has set. They take us back to Basal’s place. Houses and palm trees stand out in the twilight against mountains in the background. We spend the evening with the women: the mother, the wife, Basal’s sister… and the children… And suddenly the sound of an engine… It’s Basal. He has just returned from Najran. A really unexpected return. He is friendly as always. He welcomes us. We spend a moment in the mufredj. We ask him to find us someone who can show us tomorrow the neighboring wadis: Kitaf, Al Abou Joubara. We go to bed without knowing if there will be someone who can drive us. We have an appointment for breakfast at 6:30 – at dawn –

and we know well that we will not leave before 8:00. Linda’s attitude is too often that of an American tourist. She doesn’t get it and makes no effort to participate, to truly take part in the trip. I asked her ten times to cover her neck and arms… She thinks she is in New York. I am so happy this evening to be in Amlah, which Myriam and I dreamt of for so long. I feel guilty sometimes for having brought along Linda who does not seem to grasp what a privilege she has to be able to take part in these extraordinary moments with us. I sometimes have the urge to say: it’s like jam for pigs.
We left Saada on foot. We passed the first checkpoint on foot, no one asked for anything. We waited till 11:30 for the first car. In Dammage, we perceive a few Jews who must live in the group of houses not far from a

car repairer and the gas pump (there are several gas pumps). They were crossing the road and seemed to be going somewhere together… to Shabbat prayers??? I am very nervous; I greatly fear the checkpoint on the Amlah road. By chance, we won’t see one. I recognized the little hill after which, on a slight incline, stood some soldiers. Our driver seems to tell us that they definitely removed the checkpoint. The last difficulty of this long, very long trip, which I had feared so much, is now behind us. I take a deep breath from the top of our pick-up where the wind lashes my face. I am captivated by the landscape and its unparalleled beauty.

Sunday 19 I do not know of a landscape more oniric than that of Amlah, than the view from the roof of Basal’s old house. I wonder if the houses standing before me are quite real, if the palm trees are real. And these mountains…are they??? We feel the first rays of the sun on the terrace of the (new) house as we sip a cup of coffee, then tea with milk with our friend Basal… with this dream scenery in front of us. For the first time, since we arrived in Yemen, we listen to Radio France International, the 7:30 news. Is it possible that in 4 days we will be back in Paris? We have breakfast, we chat, it’s 8:30. We ask Basal to get one of his friends to accompany us to see Kitaf and Wadi Abou Joubara. A few steps from here there are

??????<div class="note"></div> we are going to negotiate a price. At first, he asks for 1000. After a long discussion and Basal’s intervention, we get this down to 500 Yemenite riyals – I say Yemenite because we are very close to Saudi Arabia and the two currencies are circulating. The Saudi riyal is worth twice that of the Yemenite riyal. It is already an exorbitant price, considering that we paid 200 to do Saada-Amlah. It is 9 o’clock. We set off for Kitaf. Stone and sand landscape. After five minutes on the road, from the summit of the mountain, we have an extraordinary view of all Wadi Amlah. Unfortunately, we face the sun and we will have to try to come back late afternoon. The road that leads to Kitaf is long: mountains and stone as far as the eye can see. Here and there, we see a Bedouin camp, but not one earthen house for almost an hour and a half. Then we enter Wadi Kitaf. Our driver asks, several times,

for “the way,” our way. We pass in front of a school where 3 friendly Egyptian teachers, who speak good English – rather unexpectedly – invite us to drink tea, eat, “any service,” in their words. I am in the back of the pick-up as usual, Myriam and Linda sit in front next to the driver. We are in the heart of Kitaf. We arrive in front of a little blue shack. Once again, our driver stops and ask us for “the way.” Soldiers are standing there, we greet them. We are told that Wadi Abou Joubara is at least 1 ½ or 2 hour drive from here so we renounce going there. We return to Amlah. The driver asks the way again from a group of men standing on the side of the road. We had in fact taken a much longer road to come from Amlah. A Qabili shows us the way… and asks to see our papers…

He checks our visas, spends a while calculating if they are still valid… and gives them back to us. We return to Amlah in 1 hour, that’s half the time it took on the way there. When we arrive at Basal’s place, he is unloading medicines he brought back from Saudi Arabia for his dispensary and screwing back the insides of cabinet doors that were full of medicines. I feel bad. My morale is low. The trip to Kitaf was not successful. We hang around until lunch… and then we hang around some more
after lunch. Each new sound of an engine announces the arrival of a new client for Basal. The clients continue to arrive all afternoon. One suffers from diarrhea, another from headaches… Basal even functions as a dentist… After anesthesizing a patient on the doorstep,

he extracts a tooth. Soon it will be 4 o’clock. I ask him to please take us to the summit of the mountain so I can photograph the wadi and take a little tour of it… We go out for an hour. Basal left 1 client whose child is suffering from diarrhea. He gave the child medication and asked the mother to wait. Linda needs to repair a bracelet and this is just as well because further down the wadi is an artisan who can fix it for her – but he isn’t there. His wife and children are there and we leave behind the bracelet, he will bring it back to us repaired as soon as he returns. View over Amlah from the Kitaf road – extraordinary. We return home as the sun sets. We linger on the roof with the women. Basal’s wife has cooked butter

to which she added sorghum flour (cooked in a pot over a hot stone). This is what gives that special taste to the butter which is eaten (poured over “bent sahrn” or other dishes). The butter is then sieved in order to separate the sorghum which was only needed to add taste. The butter is then preserved in stone dishes where it hardens. After twilight when the palm trees are outlined against the background of the mountain, we go to the mufredj which is steeped in incense smoke. Soon it’s time for the news in English on the TV… and this evening we won’t be treated to the weather. “The all country will have fine weather.” We take some family photos. Basal is still in his dispensary with nocturnal clients. Weary, we go to bed.

It’s our last night in Amlah, in our hospital room where an impression of cleanliness reigns, although the toilets are smelly… Tomorrow we leave for Saada… and we may reach Sanaa if we do not arrive too late.
break
Our expedition almost ran aground badly. Our very young driver was badly acquainted with the Kitaf road. As for Jews, he had no idea where they lived. When we reached the entrance to the wadi, he stopped every 5 minutes to ask where the Jews lived. I never felt so uncomfortable. I will never forget our arrival in Kitaf when our driver gets out of the car, approaches the blue sentry box and asks where Al Yahood lives. He doesn’t realize that he is in the shack of a Jewish jeweler. There must have been 6 young military police soldiers there. I find it hard to hide my fear… And if they ask us for our papers? Officially we do not have permission to be there… Fortunately the women are there to look at the jewelry which the Jew shows us.

Myriam and Linda buy a dozen rings… These minutes seem to me an eternity. I can think of only one thing: to leave as quickly as possible. We are truly in the lion’s den… Now our driver asks us to get back into the car. The Jew will come with us and take us to his place where he has older pieces of jewelry. We stayed maybe a quarter of an hour at his place but I was so worried by the danger that seemed to me imminent that I could only think of getting away quickly. In the mufredj, we of course accepted a cup of tea. We couln’t do otherwise. Then we quickly looked at the jewelry and left. I forgot to say that, because of the danger, we renounced going to Wadi Al Abou Joubara.

Monday 20
<span class="chrono-link">Sanaa, Sanaa, Sanaa…</span> Got up at dawn – saw the sun rise one last time over Amlah from the terrace of Basal’s house. Said goodbye to all our friends – even horrible little Salah… Aren’t all Salehs horrible?!! We passed by the house of the sheikh. He was at home. We bid him goodbye. A friend of Basal is leaving for Saada. He agrees to take us. I spend four hours in the pick-up standing all alone. Myriam and Linda are in front with the driver, a friendly fellow. The sun is not too high; the light is beautiful. Superb view of Rarhir, with Djebel Banach Barach appearing in the distance. We stop to have some tea and smoke a madar. We left at 9 and arrived at 13:00 with half an hour break. And the guy is driving fast. We stop in the village after Dammage. We thank our driver. Softly on foot we admire one

last time the incredible earthen architecture, We reach Saada. We thought we would catch the 2 o’clock bus… but it seems to have broken down on the road as it has not yet arrived. We collect the stuff we left at Hotel Rharban and go look for a taxi. Half an hour later, we leave for Sanaa. Left at 14:00, arrived at 18:00 (after one flat tyre) at Babel Cho’oub. We take a taxi and go to Jean’s place. <span class="chrono-link">Reunion with the old rat.</span> We spend the evening together. We dine “at the fish.” We sleep at the Hotel Al Hamd, a former Imam’s palace converted into a hotel. Old charm. Modern comfort. Less expensive than Sam City. In short, we are content.

would oblige us to get into explanations which Would perhaps raise other questions we don’t want to get into. Another point which Myriam and I noticed and which slightly contradicts Jean’s view that the PLO has lost some of its standing, is that all our Muslim friends do not stop talking about the PLO which they “fully support,” and often make the V victory sign. The PLO seems to inspire respect and admiration here.

????
Moussa’s elderly father notices that I am trying to photograph him and hides his face. He too questions us, and wa nts to know if we can read the Hebrew text hanging behind us. We look at it and say no, we have to, but our eyes say yes; they express the fact that we cannot say yes while we have a great desire to do so. The heavy silence helps them understand. The atmosphere is too charged in the mufredj and I think it is best we leave; I ask Moussa to show me his workshop where I would like to photograph him. Salah arrives and, with his mouth full of qat, plays the fool by putting the wicker basket on his head (see photo). By chance, Myriam finds a ring that needs to be filed as it does not fit her finger, and the file is in his neighbor’s workshop which is closed. In short, we have a pretext to return tomorrow.
PS. I forgot to mention that, as we entered Sagayn, at the entrance to the village we came across the husband of the “doe” (from Ajar) who, now that she is married, lives in wadi el Rhawalid. Her husband hands us half a photo we gave to Losay the night before, which depicted the “doe” and Losay. Obviously, her husband cut the photo in two in order to keep only his wife. He asks us for more photos but we say we have no more. In fact, we do have one but in the view of Gassem and Abdalah

and will certainly come and see us in France, after Ramadan. I am so happy to be able to tell them all this with my three Arabic words and smattering of Hebrew… and my hands. Myriam calls out to me to say we must leave. The Mahdi, Abdalah… and the prostitute are insufferable. The prostitute seems to be saying that we are sleeping in a threesome, Linda, Myriam and I. We end the evening at Jerhadi’s place, always accompanied by our escort, to our misfortune. Jerhadi seems the first to be annoyed by the presence of these nuisances. A neighbor of J.R. is there with his wife this evening (they are Jewish) but he seems to have drunk a bit too much and begins to ask us questions about Israel and the Jews in America. He is also heavy going. Seeing that our Qabilis will not let us go, we decide to leave and go to bed, and we promise Jerhadi to come and have breakfast with him tomorrow morning before he goes to the souk.
